All right, so armed with the knowledge of what we learned in the last video,
let's see what you can do with that information.
First thing we want to do is test out the statement about dependency
on an accessible method.
So, we're going to change our abstract class,
we're going to remove the single abstract method as follows.
I'm basically just going to delete that.
Now, this generates a compile error.
You can't resolve method do something in an abstract class, so that makes sense.
Yet our anonymous class that we've defined up here on line 24,
or within the code block I should say still has a public method doSomething declared.
An anonymous class is defined by the type its local variable reference
or method parameter is declared to be,
and it is that types method using polymorphism,
which will get invoked.
So although we've still got a public method doSomething on the anonymous class,
as you can see on screen there, the surrounding code is not aware of the anonymous class,
it is after all unnamed
and can only reference a known object on a known type,
that's why we've got that error on line 32.
An anonymous class is not restricted
to only containing those methods in the declared type,
but it is only the declared types methods that can be invoked
from outside of the anonymous class.
All right, so let's go back and put that method back in again.
So, I'll just undo those changes and obviously, that'll fix the error,
but now that I've done that, let's change public to protected.
You can see that we haven't got an error there,
so the method that the anonymous class will implement or override
does not need to be public on the declared type,
it just needs to have the correct accessibility for the invoking code.
It's commonly thought an anonymous class relies strictly
on an interface or an abstract class.
Although this is very common in practice, the anonymous class is not limited to this.
An anonymous class can actually extend any class.
So, let's actually add some code down here,
the last line of code in the test anonymous method.
So this code that I've pasted in demonstrates that an anonymous class
can extend any class including in this test
object.
So, we're on the code.
And we can see that it works.
All right, so next, what I want to do is demonstrate an interface example,
as well as chaining the object creation with the method invocation.
So to do that, I need to paste in some more code,
the end of the same method, the test anonymous method.
So here, what I'm doing is I'm instantiating and declaring the anonymous class
using the Doable interface,
but I'm not assigning it to a local variable.
Instead, I'm simply executing the doSomething method on the instantiated object.
So note that I'm utilizing the local variable b,
I'll just close down the wrong window.
That's an object, you can see that we created on line 36, just prior.
I'm using that in the method of this anonymous class,
specifically line 48.
So, if we run this,
we can see the output down the screen.
So, let's add another example here again in the same place at the end of the test anonymous method.
So here what I'm doing, if we have a look at the code starting on line 55,
I'm creating a local abstract class and defining a constructor for it.
Yes, abstract classes can have constructors.
Remember that anonymous classes cannot have constructors.
So once I've done that, I immediately use that local abstract
class for the creation of an anonymous class.
And note that I've added an instance initializer in the anonymous class.
All right, so if we run the code now,
we can see the relevant output at the bottom of the screen.
All right, so let's try one more example now,
this time I want to demonstrate that passing an anonymous class as a parameter
to a method.
All right, so for that, we need a new class, so let's go ahead and create that.
Okay, we're going to call this class AnonymousSecondExample.
All right, so in terms of this code,
you can see that we've got a public class there, AnnonymousSecondExample.
We've got a private interface Summable on line 11,
which will be the basis for our anonymous example.
And you can see that that's got one method getTotal that takes an array of float
and returns a double value.
We also got a public static method – invokeSummable,
which is a method that simply executes the getTotal method on any object
passed to it that implements the summable interface.
And scrolling down a bit further, we've got a main method there
that calls the invokeSummable method and passes an anonymous class expression
as the first parameter,
the summable parameter named Summable.
All right, so if we run this code,
you can see the output there is 61.30.
So, hopefully, you can see there that an anonymous class expression as a parameter
is a bit unwieldy here and perhaps a better solution would be a lambda expression
and we will be talking about lambda expressions quite a bit in later videos.
For now, what I want to do is summarize the benefits of the four nested classes
that we've looked at in the various videos in this section of the course,
and ultimately why you'd want to use them.
So specifically, what we've discussed is four types of nested classes as I’ve mentioned,
and they are the static nested class,
as well as the non-static classes Inner member, Local and Anonymous.
Now that you've seen them in practice, you still might be questioning why you'd want to use them.
The benefits and nested classes
are firstly that it's a way to group classes logically
and in one place for ease of use.
Secondly, increased encapsulation
(the hiding and protection of both data and implementation is better).
Thirdly, code is more readable,
simply because the class you've been using has been introduced
in the same code set.
And fourth, code is considerably more maintainable.
Again, the proximity of your classes and code to the consuming code
makes it much easier to debug and understand.
So when do you use nested classes?
Well, firstly, a static nested class -
Use this nested class when you want to embed static fields of behavior
in a nested fashion,
where using the static members via a hierarchical structure is logical.
Using Inner classes – Well, an inner class is a class member
and you can declare instance variables of its type.
So, use this class when the member is dependent on the enclosing
class and more complex.
So in other words, an engine might not have a reason for existence outside of an automobile
and therefore engine might be a candidate for an inner class
if it's not required in any other context.
So, when to use a local class?
Well, a local class is typically defined
in a method body and is generally a way to maintain
both state and behavior on a set of data for a short amount of time
and that is specific only for that particular functionality.
So, if you're trying to execute a single set of behavior,
an anonymous class is probably a better choice.
If you're temporarily maintaining state and may wait
to delay execution on behavior or state is changing,
then the local class would be your choice.
So, local class is a local variable.
You need it briefly and it's immediately expendable.
And lastly, when to use anonymous classes?
Well, the anonymous class is a great way to customize
behavior very quickly without the overhead of a class declaration.
Generally, you want to write custom code for a particular method
defined by an interface or abstract method.
Event handling in a JavaFX application
is an example where anonymous classes are used quite often.
All right, so let's move away from nested classes now because obviously,
we've been working on them for quite some time.
There are three reference types in Java and only one type
can be public in a source file.
Now, we've discussed the class reference top
and the interface reference type in great detail,
both here as well as in my 1Z0-819 Part 1 course
available on Udemy as well.
In the next video, what I want to do is start talking about the third
reference type in detail, the enum,
a type that supports an enumerated set of data.
See you in that next video.